---
layout: post
title: "Beyond Good and Evil §260"
categories: [philosophy]
tags: [philosophy, nietzche, bge]
---
#### Aphorism 260

Nietzche, surveying our myriad conceptions of morality throughout history, distinguishes 'two basic types': master morality and slave morality.

He suggests that in most 'higher and mixed' cultures there are attempts at mediation, frequently confusion, and sometimes harsh juxtopositions between these types. Post-war liberal democraices are perhaps an example of the first, the willful ignorance of the antipodes the second. There are countless, past and present, instances of the third.

It is the man who lives according to **master morality** who is the determiner of values. For this man, 'good' and 'bad' correspond to what is 'noble' and 'despicable'. He despises those of lower rank, his opposites.

Here good and bad – for them good and evil – correspond merely to that which makes easier the existence of suffering, and that which does not. It is a morality of utility.

For the noble man, duties exist only to his equals – to those of lower rank he may act 'beyond good and evil'.

Nietzche locates the source of the antithesis – good and evil – in **slave morality**. The slave is suspicious of the virtues of the powerful, and 'would like to convince himself that happiness itself is not genuine among them'. 'Evil' is thus conceived as power over him, and as danger, as it is opposed to those qualities which reduce suffering for the weak.

Source: Nietzche, Beyond Good and Evil, trans. Hollingdale (Penguin 2003).
